Java in 2025 means java backened, spring boot, cloud micoservices for most in demand jobs.

most common java jobs:
1. backened web developer - java 17/21 - spring boot, rest apis, databases, docker, cloud
Buzzwords to know- microservices, rest, kafka, aws/azure/gcp, ci/cd

- narrow/routine coding roles are being exposed to AI and being prone to cut
- Back-end/software engineers who can design systems, understand databases, performance, security, and work with cloud are strong.+

plan:

1.) Work on becoming a backened web developer:


plan for the project:
1.) create backend for react -> user database.
2.) work on frontend
3.) work on product

postgres
12345

Springboot architecture:
Controller - HTTP requests post/get (revievces json daata from react)
Service: buinessness logic - how user interaction effects databases
Repository - CRUD of the database
model = entities
DTO - data transfer object (incoming data from react (name,password,email))
StringUtils checks if a dto request is emppty or not e.g. if user entered their email in the input, if it was empty then do x

defintions:
@RestController - java class that returns json/text. this handles http requesats
@column maps varables to the databse columnn

Insant is basically calucaltiing the time in nano seconds e.g time when account was created.

interface in the repositories will tell java to create a class that can CRUD with the database.
the JpaRepo<T, entity> = JPA requries a entity type which is the x entity and a ID for the data you want (user.ID). 
Optinal is basically an error catch e.g, if you try to find a user that doesnt exisit it wont crash. 

Command Line Runner - for the seeder class is basically the boot code that runs when you start springboot
Component - tells spring to create an instance or a spring bean
Profile - lets you control when to run a class (only as dev)

Websockets - client and endpoint talking to each other at all times. e.g chat messages "typing.." (talking on the phone)
HTTP/REST - The client sends and waits for a response back. (Sending handwritten messages)
FRONTEND: 

useEffect in React: is used when you "render" things such as fetching, updating, writing to localstorage, etc
its usually after React renders the fetch -> do this

useParams() ->  to get the parameter in the url.

@GetMapping (reading) -> retrieving data / not editinbg
@PostMapping (create/action) -> creating objects e.g users
@PutMapping (updating/replace/delete) -> updating prices/user info

flow:
react (where the user enters data) -> controller (recieves https reuqests so data) -> Service (what user wants to do with the data) -> Repoository (CRUD) -> database

flow in detail:
user enters value e.g name/email/password into react, react turns it into a json file, that gets sent to the controller which handles http request and verifies if the connect and maps the values fron the json into a dto. then the controller calls on the service class which verifies if the data given exisits in the data base or not. if it doesnt, it creates and account and the repo creates a new data for the database. 


Then goes back = database, repo, service, controller, react



TODO:
12/15
1.) integrate address during sign up (done)
2.) properly display it on the user address (done)
3.) being able to edit it. (done)
4.) error when editing user info, if password is unchanged, the password would update to nothing when saved (done)
5.) address doesnt get displayed unless you edit the profile info. (done)
6.) move controller logic to service class (done)
7.) email already in used in sign up doesnt work in the sign up.,it only appears in the address sign up part (done)

12/18 TODO
1.) add products (done)
2.) created by (done)
3.) fix image products  (kinda)
4.) display products (no)

1/7 TODO:
- work on user products done
- display products done
- display images done
- when product is clicked, send to a products page with information done 

1/8 TODO:
- finishing designing product info done
- make sure everything for the product gets displayed done
- makeing sure page knows its your product vs a customers done? i think
- edit product info done
- delete item


1/11 TODO:
- delete feature done

1/12 TODO:
- specfic categories of products done
- populate items in product database done
- display items in home (for everyone/based on categoires)

1/13 TODO:
- display items on home screen (done)
- make sure it knows whether its your item or not (done)
- add a "click here for more items" (done)
- create pages for each item category (done)


1/14 TODO:
- when user clicks see more, it directs them to a page with products based on whichever category they want (done)
- design the see more page and home (done)

